whatIsResearch.md, before:


## What Does It Mean To "Do Research"?


I recently participated on a graduate panel for undergraduates thinking about graduate school in statistics. We were asked something to the effect of what would you recommend focusing on to get ready for graduate school? Several of us said "do research," but there was some push back. What did we mean by that? In the moment, it was hard to describe, but as I've thought about it, here is what I've come up with.

Broadly, "doing research" means one of the following:

- build a new tool to solve a new problem,
- build a new tool to solve an old problem, 
- use an old tool to solve a new problem,
- or use an old tool to solve an old problem.

Some examples that seem more actionable are:

- improve someone else's work,
- identify a problem in a pre-existing approach,
- or start fleshing out a vague idea thrown into someone else's "future work." 

However, wrapped up in the actual "doing" is also writing and talking about your work. There is also a lot of not doing. 

My typical day:

- I understand this.
- Wait, I'm confused.
- Hours go by...
- Oh, I see.
- Repeat.

As graduate students we need to "do research", but why did we all agree that undergraduates should "do research" ahead of time? "Doing research" must translate to some set of skills that we are building to take with us to graduate school or into the workforce. 


Marcia C. Linn, Erin Palmer, Anne Baranger, Elizabeth Gerard, and Elisa Stone discuss this in their 2015 Science paper: "Undergraduate research experiences: Impacts and opportunities".

Undergraduate research helps you:

- learn "science practices" (lab techniques, data analysis, communication via writing and speaking),
- "develop a scientific identity,"
- and build "resilience to failure."

Agreed! The first one is the most obvious. Having more technical skills in your field is a signal that you are proficient and capable of learning more. Pragmatically, a sense of scientific identity is important for your statement of purpose and interviews. You need to be able to show that you have a reason to go to graduate school (or take a job) and you can see your place in the field. I cannot stress enough how crucial resilience is. Graduate school is hard, really hard. I'm **not** saying don't do it, but I **am** saying don't do it lightly. Research is often an iterative process, with lots of starting-over moments. Failure is inevitable, so undergraduate research allows you to practice failing and recovering with grace (or at least recovering, period).

I would like to add that "doing research" also helps you learn:

- how to read the literature
- how to make connections between lines of work
- how to manage your time, including unstructured time
- how to set goals and make steps towards these goals
- how to work independently
- a sense of service (someone helped you do research, so you will help someone else when the opportunity presents itself)

In hindsight, when we were telling undergraduates to "do research" we really meant start building the skills that you will need in graduate school.

A follow up question presented to me by one of my students is: how important is originality and creativity in research? Can you really be doing research without coming up with your own idea of what to pursue? Are originality and creativity skills one can build?

I agree that creativity is important. A respected researcher does not just create one hammer in graduate school and then spend the rest of their career seeking nails (or worse yet, treating everything as a nail). However, expecting creativity early on seems daunting. Sure we have to solve a series of problems to get a PhD, but choosing a problem comes first and at a stage where we are least knowledgeable. To me it seems standard to have a faculty member suggest a first research project, or at least suggest some papers to read or a general topic to dig into. But how do we make the jump between being handed a problem and identifying a problem ourselves?

This is a problem I am still currently facing, so I hit the library where I came across Peter Borwein, Peter Liljedahl, and Helen Zhai's book "Mathematicians on Creativity". In this book the authors adapt [Jacques Hadamard's classic survey](https://www.amazon.com/Psychology-Invention-Mathematical-Field/dp/0486201074) of exceptional mathematicians and solicit responses from contemporary ``greats" in mathematics. This survey is meant to understand the role of invention and the creative process in mathematics. Honestly, I am a bit deterred by the fact that only prominent mathematicians were asked to answer this survey, but I guess we can still learn from the greats.

Commit message:

finish up quote section about creativity, still a rather weak ending

whatIsResearch.md, after:


## What Does It Mean To "Do Research"?


I recently participated on a graduate panel for undergraduates thinking about graduate school in statistics. We were asked something to the effect of what would you recommend focusing on to get ready for graduate school? Several of us said "do research," but there was some push back. What did we mean by that? In the moment, it was hard to describe, but as I've thought about it, here is what I've come up with.

Broadly, "doing research" means one of the following:

- build a new tool to solve a new problem,
- build a new tool to solve an old problem, 
- use an old tool to solve a new problem,
- or use an old tool to solve an old problem.

Some examples that seem more actionable are:

- improve someone else's work,
- identify a problem in a pre-existing approach,
- or start fleshing out a vague idea thrown into someone else's "future work." 

However, wrapped up in the actual "doing" is also writing and talking about your work. There is also a lot of not doing. 

My typical day:

- I understand this.
- Wait, I'm confused.
- Hours go by...
- Oh, I see.
- Repeat.

As graduate students we need to "do research", but why did we all agree that undergraduates should "do research" ahead of time? "Doing research" must translate to some set of skills that we are building to take with us to graduate school or into the workforce. 


Marcia C. Linn, Erin Palmer, Anne Baranger, Elizabeth Gerard, and Elisa Stone discuss this in their 2015 Science paper: "Undergraduate research experiences: Impacts and opportunities".

Undergraduate research helps you:

- learn "science practices" (lab techniques, data analysis, communication via writing and speaking),
- "develop a scientific identity,"
- and build "resilience to failure."

Agreed! The first one is the most obvious. Having more technical skills in your field is a signal that you are proficient and capable of learning more. Pragmatically, a sense of scientific identity is important for your statement of purpose and interviews. You need to be able to show that you have a reason to go to graduate school (or take a job) and you can see your place in the field. I cannot stress enough how crucial resilience is. Graduate school is hard, really hard. I'm **not** saying don't do it, but I **am** saying don't do it lightly. Research is often an iterative process, with lots of starting-over moments. Failure is inevitable, so undergraduate research allows you to practice failing and recovering with grace (or at least recovering, period).

I would like to add that "doing research" also helps you learn:

- how to read the literature
- how to make connections between lines of work
- how to manage your time, including unstructured time
- how to set goals and make steps towards these goals
- how to work independently
- a sense of service (someone helped you do research, so you will help someone else when the opportunity presents itself)

In hindsight, when we were telling undergraduates to "do research" we really meant start building the skills that you will need in graduate school.

A follow up question presented to me by one of my students is: how important is originality and creativity in research? Can you really be doing research without coming up with your own idea of what to pursue? Are originality and creativity skills one can build?

I agree that creativity is important. A respected researcher does not just create one hammer in graduate school and then spend the rest of their career seeking nails (or worse yet, treating everything as a nail). However, expecting creativity early on seems daunting. Sure we have to solve a series of problems to get a PhD, but choosing a problem comes first and at a stage where we are least knowledgeable. To me it seems standard to have a faculty member suggest a first research project, or at least suggest some papers to read or a general topic to dig into. But how do we make the jump between being handed a problem and identifying a problem ourselves?

This is a problem I am still currently facing, so I hit the library where I came across Peter Borwein, Peter Liljedahl, and Helen Zhai's book "Mathematicians on Creativity". In this book the authors adapt [Jacques Hadamard's classic survey](https://www.amazon.com/Psychology-Invention-Mathematical-Field/dp/0486201074) of exceptional mathematicians and solicit responses from contemporary "greats" in mathematics. This survey is meant to understand the role of invention and the creative process in mathematics. Honestly, I am a bit deterred by the fact that only prominent mathematicians were asked to answer this survey, but I guess we can still learn from the greats in a field close to our own.

I will end with some quotes that resonated with me. Full disclosure: I definitely cherry-picked the quotes that I agree with in that they follow some themes:

- Success comes from perserverence and a little luck.
- Intuition can be built through experience.
- Creativity, ultimately comes with mastery. You have to have a breadth of knowledge with enough depth to see how things fit together.

To be sure, there are plenty of people who think you either have "it" or you don't, but I choose to have a growth mentality. 

> "When reading, my first questions are: what are the tools used, do the definitions make sense, what are the data, what is only supposed to exist. What I try to remember is picture, possibly conflicting, with caveat, to know what is true, as well as what is provable —and which tools can be used to prove such and such." - Pierre Rene Deligne

> "At first I'm terribly confused, but after awhile I chip away at my wrong ideas until I’m left with an answer. So I think I'm working in the sculptor mode, rather than the inspired painter." -Bradley Efron

> "So learning is discovery with more signposts provided by someone who has been down this path before." - George Andrews

> "Perhaps the key feature of the whole process is making connections. One has to recognize that two apparently disparate facts have something in common. Then comes the '99% perspiration' of nailing down exactly what is happening." - Richard Stanley

> "It’s somewhat like hunting or fishing. Luck plays a significant part, but your odds are much better if you have some judgement and experience about the regions where you think the big game are likely to be." - Elwyn Berlekamp
